Python MongoDB
Python can be used in database applications.

One of the most popular NoSQL database is MongoDB.

MongoDB
MongoDB stores data in JSON-like documents, which makes the database very flexible and scalable.

To be able to experiment with the code examples in this tutorial, you will need access to a MongoDB database.

You can download a free MongoDB database at https://www.mongodb.com.

PyMongo
Python needs a MongoDB driver to access the MongoDB database.

In this tutorial we will use the MongoDB driver "PyMongo".

We recommend that you use PIP to install "PyMongo".

PIP is most likely already installed in your Python environment.

Navigate your command line to the location of PIP, and type the following:

Download and install "PyMongo":

C:\Users\Your Name\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python36-32\Scripts>python -m pip install pymongo
Now you have downloaded and installed a mongoDB driver.

Test PyMongo
To test if the installation was successful, or if you already have "pymongo" installed, create a Python page with the following content:

demo_mongodb_test.py:

import pymongo
If the above code was executed with no errors, "pymongo" is installed and ready to be used.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Python MongoDB Create Database
Creating a Database
To create a database in MongoDB, start by creating a MongoClient object, then specify a connection URL with the correct ip address and the name of the database you want to create.

MongoDB will create the database if it does not exist, and make a connection to it.

Example
Create a database called "mydatabase":

import pymongo

myclient = pymongo.MongoClient("mongodb://localhost:27017/")

mydb = myclient["mydatabase"]
Important: In MongoDB, a database is not created until it gets content!

MongoDB waits until you have created a collection (table), with at least one document (record) before it actually creates the database (and collection).

Check if Database Exists
Remember: In MongoDB, a database is not created until it gets content, so if this is your first time creating a database, you should complete the next two chapters (create collection and create document) before you check if the database exists!

You can check if a database exist by listing all databases in you system:

Example
Return a list of your system's databases:

print(myclient.list_database_names())
Or you can check a specific database by name:

Example
Check if "mydatabase" exists:

dblist = myclient.list_database_names()
if "mydatabase" in dblist:
  print("The database exists.")
